2009/04/07 DAC.

Pixel Spacing Test Images.

Purpose.

The purpose of these test images to is to evaluate how display software performs
when confronted by different pixel spacing related attributes in DICOM projection
radiography images, and how these affect distance and size measurements made
by the user.

Background.

Unlike cross-sectional modalities like CT and MR, in which the physical spacing
is known, regardless of where in the body the measurement is being made, there
is a geometric magnification effect caused by the diverging x-ray beam, which
is generated at a point source and diverges as it passes through the subject
and impinges on the detector. Thus the distance between the source and the
detector and the distance between the object within the subject being measured
and the detector varies, depending on the acquisition geometry and where within
the subject the object being measured is located.

Within film-screen projection radiography, measurements are traditionally made
on the film itself, hence any object close to the film will be measured with
the correct size, and any object significantly closer to the source than the
film will be magnified, and measured with a size larger than actual size.

An acquisition modality or its user may provide some mechanism for compensating
for this effect, and provide additional "calibration" information in order
to improve the accuracy of a measurement in a particular location or plane;
any such "calibration" is of course only applicable to measurements made
at the specified location or plane, and measurements of anything else will
be inaccurate.

In the DICOM attributes, for cross-sectional modalities, the physical spacing
between pixels is encoded in Pixel Spacing (0028,0030).

For projection radiography, the pixel spacing at the plane of the detector is
specified in Imager Pixel Spacing (0018,1164).

Since CP 586, if both Pixel Spacing (0028,0030) and Imager Pixel Spacing (0018,1164)
are present in a projection radiography image, and they have different values,
then the image is deemed to have been "calibrated", and addtitional attributes
are provided to describe whether this calibration was performed with respect
to some object of known size visible in the image ("fiducial") or some known
characteristic of the acquisition system ("geometry").

Test Images.

A set of 8 test images are provided, 2 each for 4 modalities (CR, DX, MG, XA).

One of each pair contains both Pixel Spacing and Imager Pixel Spacing, as well
as the CP 586 calibration-related descriptive attributes.

The other contains only Imager Pixel Spacing, and not Pixel Spacing; it also
includes the Estimated Radiographic Magnification factor.

Within the pixel data of each image is a description of the expected result
and a burned in ruler of fixed length.

Test Procedure.

For each image in the test set:

- Display the image

- Make a linear distance (ruler) measurement of the burned in ruler.

- Compare the distance, units and type of measurement reported by the display
software with the expected results described in the text in the image.

Expected Results.

Under no circumstances should the result be reported in pixels rather than mm;
this implies that the display software does not recognize the spacing attributes
at all.

For the set of images that contain Imager Pixel Spacing and not Pixel Spacing,
the display software may report either a measurement that is valid at the detector
plane, or which is corrected for geometric magnification using the magnification
factor explicitly encoded in the object; the latter behavior is required by the
IHE Mammography profile. A SYSTEM THAT REPORTS THESE IN PIXELS IS VERY LIKELY
DESIGNED ONLY FOR DISPLAY OF CROSS-SECTIONAL, AND NOT PROJECTION IMAGES.

For the set of images that also contain Pixel Spacing, the display software may
either report the calibrated value, the detector plane value, or a value
corrected for geometric magnification.

In any case, the display software should report to the user what type of measurement
is being displayed, since it is potentially unsafe if the user is not made aware
of what plane their measurements may be accurate for, and conversely, for which
other planes their measurements will be inaccurate. A SYSTEM THAT REPORTS THE
CALIBRATED VALUE WITHOUT WARNING THE USER MAY VIOLATE THE USER'S ASSUMPTION THAT
THE BEHAVIOR IS "FILM-LIKE", I.E., THAT THE MEASUREMENT IS VALID AT THE DETECTOR
PLANE.

One suggestion to implementors is to append a suffix to the units of the measurement
to indicate the type of measurement (e.g., "detector", "calibrated", "fiducial", etc.,
versus "3D" for a cross-sectional or tomographic measurement). For maximum flexibility,
and to promote awareness of the issue of projection radiography measurement accuracy,
the system could provide the user with a choice when multiplt different "types"
of spacing information is available.

End.
